BIP drafts: SwiftSync Specification (#2152)
bitcoin/bips: bip-xxxx-block-undo.md

```
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Peer Services
  Title: Peer sharing of block spent coins
  Authors: Robert Netzke <bips@2140.dev>
  Deputies: Ruben Somsen <bips@2140.dev>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Specification
  Assigned: ?
  License: BSD-3-Clause
```

# Abstract

> Inputs of a Bitcoin block are referenced by the outpoint data structure. This poses a limitation during initial block download (IBD), such that a client must process blocks sequentially to validate the chain history. The SwiftSync protocol allows blocks to be evaluated in arbitrary order, however additional data is required that must be served over the peer-to-peer network. Namely, the creation height, coinbase flag, input script, and amount for each spent coin must be accessible to fully validate a block in a state-less manner. This data cannot be trusted by a peer under usual conditions, however SwiftSync allows a client performing IBD to validate the correctness of this data.

Reviewer: While reading the spec we notice that the bip is about sharing undo data, but that was not clear from the abstract. 

I would add a sentence along the lines of "This document describes how to share [this additional data] over the peer to peer network"

> Inputs of a Bitcoin block are referenced by the outpoint data structure. This poses a limitation during initial block download (IBD), such that a client must process blocks sequentially to validate the chain history. The SwiftSync protocol allows blocks to be evaluated in arbitrary order, however additional data is required that must be served over the peer-to-peer network. Namely, the creation height, coinbase flag, input script, and amount for each spent coin must be accessible to fully validate a block in a state-less manner. This data cannot be trusted by a peer under usual conditions, however SwiftSync allows a client performing IBD to validate the correctness of this data.

Reviewer 2: > however additional data is required that must be served over the peer-to-peer network

I would combine this and the next sentence so it's clear what the data is required for at the end of this sentence, e.g. "... in order to validate the blocks, namely the creation height, coinbase flag...". 

> This data cannot be trusted by a peer under usual conditions

"under usual conditions" doesn't provide much value here, imo it's either trusted or validated, in this case it can't be trusted when served by a peer.

Author: Opted to remove "...creation height, coinbase flag." from the abstract as they distracted from the high level. Swapped "under usual conditions" for a more detailed explanation.

> # Motivation

Reviewer: The motivation is a bit repetitive with what's in the abstract, and there are a lot of technical details. I would reshape this a little in order to give a stronger motivation ("IBD is slow because it must be done sequentially, SwiftSync speeds this up by removing this limitation")

> # Motivation

Reviewer 2: The Abstract and Motivation repeat similar ideas. imo the Abstract part should focus more on what this proposal provides, instead of the reasoning and context that led to it. Could also merge them into one section if you want.

A current limitation of IBD is that it must be done sequentially. This is a result of the height, coinbase flag, input script, and amount of the block inputs being omitted from the data committed to by proof of work in the current block, and, thus, this data cannot be trusted if received over the wire naively. Using the SwiftSync protocol, a client is able to verify the correctness of this data, even if served by a potentially untrusted party. This is a property of the SwiftSync hash aggregate, which commits to the height, coinbase flag, script, and amount when creating and deleting coins.
# Specification

> In Bitcoin Core, to roll-back the chain state in the event of a block reorganization, the height, coinbase flag, script and amount metadata for each input of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as "undo data". This terminology stems from its use to "undo" the effect of a block by repopulating the UTXO set with the coins that were spent by the reorganized block. To remain general in language, this data will be referred as "spent coins."

Reviewer: nit: it took me a while to figure out that the coinbase flag is needed in order to check that a transaction is not spending an immature coinbase... It would be nice to have this specified somewhere to avoid confusion, but I'm not sure if it really fits here, so, as you wish

Author: Added a small note to the height code section.

> Bitcoin Core full archival nodes store spent coins for all blocks. This is useful in the context of SwiftSync, as no additional index must be created or maintained to serve this data to peers. There are, however, some discrepancies between how this data is serialized on disk in Bitcoin core and how this proposal seeks to serialize this data over the peer-to-peer protocol, which are detailed in the rationale section.

Reviewer 2: Bitcoin core / Core

This section defines how to request and serve block spent coins over the peer-to-peer protocol, as well as signaling support of this feature to peers.
## Definitions

- `[]byte`: arbitrary byte vector
- `<N bytes>`: size `N` byte vector

> - `vector<Foo>`: arbitrary sized vector of `Foo`

Reviewer: nit: I was a bit confused at first, I would reshape this a little to make it clearer:

- `[]byte`: arbitrary sequence of bytes with no fixed length
- `<N bytes>`: byte vector of size `N`, where `N` is specified inline (e.g. <32 bytes>)
- `vector<Foo>`: vector of arbitrary length of elements of type `Foo`

- `CompactSize`: encoding of unsigned integers defined in peer-to-peer messages

> - `CompressAmount`: defined in the Function Appendix section

Reviewer: nit: I would be a bit more explicit here:
- `CompressAmount`: compression function for integer amounts, as defined in the Function Appendix section

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.
## Data structures
#### Height Code

> The height and coinbase flag are encoded as a 32 bit integer. To encode the height and flag, binary left shift the height one bit, treat the boolean as a bit, insert it into the newly opened bit position. To decode the height, binary right shift the code. To decode the coinbase flag, mask the first bit position of the header code and interpret the bit as a boolean.

Reviewer: "To encode the height and flag, binary left shift the height one bit, **treat the boolean** as a bit, insert it into the newly opened bit position."

I would be slightly more explicit and say "the coinbase flag" instead of "the boolean"

| `0x00` | Unknown  | `CompactSize(Len([]bytes)) + []bytes` | `[]bytes`                                                    |
| `0x01` | `P2PKH`  | `<20 bytes>`                          | `OP_DUP OP_HASH160 20 <20 bytes> OP_EQUALVERIFY OP_CHECKSIG` |
| `0x02` | `P2PK`   | `<32 byte 0x02 parity public key>`    | `33 0x02 <32 byte public key> OP_CHECKSIG`                   |
| `0x03` | `P2PK`   | `<32 byte 0x03 parity public key>`    | `33 0x03 <32 byte public key> OP_CHECKSIG`                   |
| `0x04` | `P2PK`   | `<64 byte public key>`                | `65 0x04 <64 byte public key> OP_CHECKSIG`                   |
| `0x05` | `P2SH`   | `<20 bytes>`                          | `OP_HASH160 20 <20 bytes> OP_EQUAL`                          |
| `0x06` | `P2WSH`  | `<32 bytes>`                          | `OP_0 32 <32 bytes>`                                         |
| `0x07` | `P2WPKH` | `<20 bytes>`                          | `OP_0 20 <20 bytes>`                                         |
| `0x08` | `P2TR`   | `<32 byte X-only public key>`         | `OP_1 32 <32 bytes>`                                         |

> Scripts are serialized in this format by concatenating the `Prefix` and `Format` fields.

Reviewer: I would move this above the table, I kept wondering how to encode until I read this :)

#### Amount Format

The 64 bit unsigned integers representing amounts are compressed by first using the `CompressAmount` function defined below, and serializing the result with `CompactSize`.
#### Coin

| Field                    | Type                          | Serialization | Description                                                                                                       |
| :----------------------- | :---------------------------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Input index              | 32 bit unsigned integer       | Little endian | The index in the block inputs for which this coin corresponds. The coinbase inputs are _excluded_ from this index |

> | Height and coinbase flag | Height code                   | Little endian |                                                                                                                   |

Reviewer: I think this should have "Defined above" in "Serialization"

| `version`   | `byte`                  | Version of the expected serialization in the response                     |
| `blockhash` | 32 byte vector          | Hash of the block for which inputs are requested                          |
| `cutoff`    | 32 bit unsigned integer | If set greater than zero, only include coins created _before_ this height |

#### MSG_SPENT_COINS

`MSG_SPENT_COINS` defines the data structure for inputs of a block.

Define `cmdString` as `bspent`. Define BIP-324 message type as ???.

| Field       | Type                              | Description                                                    |
| :---------- | :-------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `blockhash` | 32 byte vector                    | Block hash these coins are spent from                          |
| `len`       | `CompactSize(Len(vector<Coins>))` | The length of the coins vector                                 |
| `coins`     | `vector<Coin>`                    | Coins that were spent, after filtering on the request `cutoff` |

> A client supporting the `bspent` MUST include coins created _before_ the `cutoff` field in `getbspent` requests. A client receiving a `bspent` message with un-requested or missing coins MUST disconnect from the serving peer. A client supporting `bspent` MUST adhere to the format of `Coin` specified in the `verion` of the request.

Reviewer: typo: verion -> version

## Specification

In Bitcoin Core, to roll-back the chain state in the event of a block reorganization, the height, coinbase flag, script and amount metadata for each input of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as "undo data". This terminology stems from its use to "undo" the effect of a block by repopulating the UTXO set with the coins that were spent by the reorganized block. To remain general in language, this data will be referred as "spent coins."

Bitcoin Core full archival nodes store spent coins for all blocks. This is useful in the context of SwiftSync, as no additional index must be created or maintained to serve this data to peers. There are, however, some discrepancies between how this data is serialized on disk in Bitcoin Core and how this proposal seeks to serialize this data over the peer-to-peer protocol, which are detailed in the rationale section.

This section defines how to request and serve block spent coins over the peer-to-peer protocol, as well as signaling support of this feature to peers.
### Definitions

- `[]byte`: arbitrary sequence of bytes with no fixed length

> - `<N bytes>`: byte vector of size N, where N is specified inline (e.g. <32 bytes>)

Reviewer 3: What encoding is used to specify the length of `N`?

- `vector<Foo>`: vector of arbitrary length of elements of type Foo

> - `CompactSize`: encoding of unsigned integers defined in peer-to-peer messages

Reviewer 3: For the sake of having a complete stand alone document, I think `CompactSize` should be specified briefly here. Otherwise, it assumes that readers are familiar with the naming/semantic conventions of the `bitcoind` codebase.

Author: Added to the functional appendix

Define `cmdString` as `bspent`. Define BIP-324 message type as ???.

| Field       | Type                              | Description                                                    |
| :---------- | :-------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `blockhash` | 32 byte vector                    | Block hash these coins are spent from                          |
| `len`       | `CompactSize(Len(vector<Coins>))` | The length of the coins vector                                 |
| `coins`     | `vector<Coin>`                    | Coins that were spent, after filtering on the request `cutoff` |

A client supporting the `bspent` MUST include coins created _before_ the `cutoff` field in `getbspent` requests. A client receiving a `bspent` message with un-requested or missing coins MUST disconnect from the serving peer. A client supporting `bspent` MUST adhere to the format of `Coin` specified in the `version` of the request.

## Signaling

Support for serving historical block undo data is advertised by a service bit. 

| Field             | Value      |
| :----------------- | :---------- |

> | `NODE_BLOCK_UNDO` | `1 << ???` |

Reviewer 3: Rationale should be added for the choice of a new node version over the more common place (as of the past few years) exchange of a `sendX` message during the version handshake. 

IMO a version makes sense here, as it can be used to filter out peers upfront that support sending this undo data over the network.

Author: I opted for a BIP-434 feature message, which has a similar mechanism for the sendX

```
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Peer Services
  Title: Peer sharing of block spent coins
  Authors: Robert Netzke <bips@2140.dev>

>   Deputies: Ruben Somsen <bips@2140.dev>

Reviewer 4: I’m confused by this email address. This should be email addresses of the authors, so that they can be contacted by interested parties.

  Status: Draft
  Type: Specification
  Assigned: ?
  License: BSD-3-Clause
  Discussion: https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev/c/FpSWUxItXQs/m/pnfjP6rFCgAJ
```

## Abstract

Inputs of a Bitcoin block are referenced by the outpoint data structure. This poses a limitation during initial block
download (IBD), such that a client must process blocks sequentially to validate the chain history. The SwiftSync
protocol allows blocks to be evaluated in arbitrary order, however additional data is required that must be served over
the peer-to-peer network. This document describes how to share this data over the peer to peer network.

## Motivation

> A current limitation of IBD is that it must be done sequentially. This is a result of the height, coinbase flag, input

Reviewer 4: > A current limitation of IBD is that it must be done sequentially.

Given the postulation or existence of alternative syncing models, that feels a bit loaded. Maybe mention that this specifically refers to Bitcoin Core or alternatively consider something along the lines of: "The common approach to IBD is to process blocks sequentially as that ensures the existence of TXO details when input validation requires them to be available."

> This is a result of the height, coinbase flag, input script, and amount of the block inputs being omitted from the data committed to by proof of work in the current block

This is jumping several steps from the prior statement at once. Maybe you could segue that a bit more, e.g., by mentioning that fields you introduce are TXO details, before going into them being only implicitly or not at all committed to by transaction inputs, before explaining how that makes it impossible to verify what is provided by a peer.

script, and amount of the block inputs being omitted from the data committed to by proof of work in the current block,
and, thus, this data cannot be trusted if received over the wire naively. Using the SwiftSync protocol, a client is able
to verify the correctness of this data, even if served by a potentially untrusted party. This allows a significant

> improvement in IBD performance, as block downloads may be done in parallel.

Reviewer 4: This is a bit imprecise: block download is always done in parallel, it’s just validation that is sequential. Do you mean that block validation can be parallelized?

## Specification

In Bitcoin Core, to roll-back the chain state in the event of a block reorganization, the height, coinbase flag, script

> and amount metadata for each input of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as "undo data". This

Reviewer 4: Maybe I’m a bit to nitpicky here, but these seem to be properties of the spent TXO, not the input.

Edit: I see that you introduce the term spent coin below, which is also fine, but maybe you want to be more precise either way.

```suggestion
and amount metadata for each spent TXO of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as "undo data". This
```

Reviewer 4: Since git is inherently meant to compare two documents line by line, please avoid reformatting entire paragraphs between commits. It shifts around all line breaks and makes it more work for reviewers to figure out what changed. Rather, leave linebreaks in the same spots, by letting the edited line be a bit longer or shorter to make it easier on reviewers to follow along what changed between two commits. Since the markdown file is just the "source code" of the rendered document, a few lines being a few characters longer or shorter is not an issue. If a line becomes too long, you can split it into two lines, but still leave the lines below unchanged.

I.e., when you changed this paragraph, the diff was:

```diff
-and amount metadata for each input of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as "undo data". This
-terminology stems from its use to "undo" the effect of a block by repopulating the UTXO set with the coins that were
-spent by the reorganized block. To remain general in language, this data will be referred as "spent coins."
+and amount metadata for each spend transaction output of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as
+"undo data". This terminology stems from its use to "undo" the effect of a block by repopulating the UTXO set with the
+coins that were spent by the reorganized block. To remain general in language, this data will be referred as "spent
+coins."
```

<img width="1318" height="161" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/caa3cac8-4fa0-47b0-ac57-e4c9602048e0" />

but it would have been much easier to see what changed if the linebreaks had stayed at the same spots:

```diff
-and amount metadata for each input of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as "undo data". This
+and amount metadata for each spend transaction output of a block are stored in a data structure known colloquially as "undo data". This
```

<img width="1492" height="94" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/67cf2eb1-b24a-49f1-927b-5c1e45afb276" />

Especially, on GitHub, this renders without highlights, so it takes much longer to find the differences: 
<img width="892" height="167" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5faa329a-9fe1-4050-a6e7-e7315989df67" />

additional index must be created or maintained to serve this data to peers. There are, however, some discrepancies
between how this data is serialized on disk in Bitcoin Core and how this proposal seeks to serialize this data over the
peer-to-peer protocol, which are detailed in the rationale section.

This section defines how to request and serve block spent coins over the peer-to-peer protocol, as well as signaling
support of this feature to peers.

### Definitions

- `[]byte`: arbitrary sequence of bytes with no fixed length
- `<N bytes>`: byte vector of size N, where N is specified inline. N is fixed length and known at compile time (e.g.
  \<32 bytes>)
- `vector<Foo>`: vector of arbitrary length of elements of type Foo
- `CompactSize`: encoding of unsigned integers defined in peer-to-peer messages, as defined in the Function Appendix
  section
- `CompressAmount`: compression function for integer amounts, as defined in the Function Appendix section

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

### Data structures

> #### Height Code

Reviewer 4: Why is it called "Height Code" when it encodes both height and coinbase flag?

When validating a block, a client must confirm coinbase outputs are mature, which is given by the height of the coin.

> The height and coinbase flag are encoded as a 32 bit integer. To encode the height and flag, binary left shift the

Reviewer 4: Maybe you could add a footnote why both are stored in one data structure, and/or mention here that even with sacrificing one bit, heights up to 2,147,483,647 can be expressed and 30,000+ years of blocks is plenty planning horizon? :p

height one bit, treat the coinbase flag as a bit, insert it into the newly opened bit position. To decode the height,
binary right shift the code. To decode the coinbase flag, mask the first bit position of the header code and interpret
the bit as a boolean.

> Take, for example, a height with binary encoding `0010 0111`. To encode a coinbase output at this height, one begins

Reviewer 4: Nit: that’s not a 32-bit integer. ;)

with a left shift: `0100 1110`, and places the coinbase flag in the least significant bit: `0100 1111`.

#### Reconstructable Script Format

> Scripts are serialized in this format by concatenating the `Prefix` and `Format` fields specified below.

Reviewer 4: This table could use a bit more context. E.g., you could mention:

- What the columns refer to
- that the table introduces a serialization that allows compressing standard output types with addresses and P2PK
- Bare scripts and future output types are not compressed

| :---------- | :---------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `blockhash` | `<32 bytes>`            | Hash of the block for which inputs are requested.                    |
| `cutoff`    | 32-bit unsigned integer | If greater than zero, include only coins created before this height. |

#### MSG_SPENT_COINS

`MSG_SPENT_COINS` defines the data structure for inputs of a block.

Define `cmdString` as `bspent`. Define BIP-324 message type as ???.

| Field       | Type                             | Description                                       |
| :---------- | :------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------ |
| `blockhash` | `<32 bytes>`                     | Block hash these coins are spent from.            |
| `len`       | `CompactSize(Len(vector<Coin>))` | Length of the coins vector.                       |
| `coins`     | `vector<Coin>`                   | Coins spent, after filtering on request `cutoff`. |

A client supporting the `bspent` MUST include coins created _before_ the `cutoff` field in `getbspent` requests. A

> client receiving a `bspent` message with un-requested or missing coins MUST disconnect from the serving peer. A client

Reviewer 4: Presumably after discarding such a message?

supporting `bspent` MUST adhere to the format of `Coin` specified in the `version` of the request.

## Signaling

Support for serving historical block spent coins is advertised by a feature message, introduced by
[BIP-434](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0434.md).

| featureid           | featuredata |
| :------------------ | :---------- |
| `blockspentcoinsv1` | `0x00`      |

A client advertising this service bit SHOULD respond to `getbspent` messages, subject to rate-limiting and bandwidth

> limiting.

Reviewer 4: Service bits are different from features advertised via BIP434. Was this an incomplete update?

Author: Yes, updated

## Rationale

The lifetime, or interval between creation and spending height, of the coins on the Bitcoin blockchain demonstrate an
empirical phenomena that the majority of coins are spent within 100 blocks. In fact, approximately 41 percent of coins
are spent within 10 blocks at the time of writing[^1]. Clients may leverage this to reduce the bandwidth required to
fetch spent coins by using an in-memory cache. For example, a client may store coins that were created in a 5 block
window, and request only coins that are older than this height via the `cutoff` filter. This results in a significant
bandwidth reduction at the cost of a cache that can be set dynamically by the client depending on available memory.

Beyond the use of a dynamic coin height filter, there are additional reasons to not simply read the spent coins from
disk and send it over the wire. Legacy fields (`nVersion`) are set to `0x00` when writing and reading this data to
maintain compatibility of disk format with old clients. Furthermore, using the amount compression specified above, an
11gb reduction in bandwidth is achieved. The application of `VARINT` as opposed to `CompactSize` offers a further

> reduction of 4gb, however the `VARINT` primitive is currently a Bitcoin Core implementation detail. Reusing existing

Reviewer 4: Given the [confusing terminology](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/q/114584/5406) in regard to `CompactSize` and `VARINT` and Bitcoin Core, you probably want to define these terms more concretely.

```

## Decompress Amount

```python
def decompress_amount(x):
    if x == 0:
        return 0
    x -= 1
    e = x % 10
    x //= 10
    n = 0
    if e < 9:
        d = (x % 9) + 1
        x //= 9
        n = x * 10 + d
    else:
        n = x + 1
    while e > 0:
        n *= 10
        e -= 1
    return n
```

`CompactSize` is commonly used to represent the size of collections in peer-to-peer messages.

## Encode compact size

```python
def encode_compactsize(n):
    if n < 0xfd:
        return bytes([n])
    elif n <= 0xffff:
        return b"\xfd" + n.to_bytes(2, "little")
    elif n <= 0xffffffff:
        return b"\xfe" + n.to_bytes(4, "little")
    else:
        return b"\xff" + n.to_bytes(8, "little")
```

## Decode compact size

```python
def decode_compactsize(b):
    prefix = b[0]
    if prefix < 0xfd:
        return prefix
    elif prefix == 0xfd:
        return int.from_bytes(b[1:3], "little")
    elif prefix == 0xfe:
        return int.from_bytes(b[1:5], "little")
    else:
        return int.from_bytes(b[1:9], "little")
```

## Compatibility

Clients seeking to perform fully-validating SwiftSync require peers that serve undo data. Serving data requires no

> additional index and may be enabled via the service bit.

Reviewer 4: Re "service bit", please double-check whether you mean to introduce a service bit or a feature.
